Journal of Curriculum Studies
ISSN: 0022-0272 (Print) 1366-5839 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tcus20
What is Teaching?

Paul H. Hirst
To cite this article: Paul H. Hirst (1971) What is Teaching?, Journal of Curriculum Studies, 3:1,
5-18, DOI: 10.1080/0022027710030102
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/0022027710030102
Published online: 09 Jul 2006.

Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2441
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tcus20

What is Teaching?
Paul H. Hirst
Professor of Education
King's College
University of London
The question with which this paper is concerned is simply "What is
teaching?". How do we distinguish teaching from other activities? This
is, I think, a very important question for at least four reasons. First, a lot
of new educational methods are now widely canvassed in which the significance of teaching is far from clear. Repeatedly one finds an almost exclusive emphasis on certain activities of the pupils, say those of enquiry,
discovery and play, not on the activities of the teacher. In the discussion
of such methods it seems to me there is much misunderstanding of what
teaching is and therefore of what it involves, and this not infrequently
leads to a very distorted view of the whole educational situation. Secondly,
people are now aware of a range of activities, some of them thought to be
morally undesirable, whose relation to teaching is by no means clear:
activities like indoctrinating, preaching, advertising and propagandizing.
There are many terms that are as it were in the same logical band as
"teaching", and we are I think rightly getting more sensitive as to whether
or not the activities these terms label ought to go on in school. If we can
get clearer about the nature of teaching it will surely help us to see the
character of these other processes and their inter-connections. Similar
problems are raised by the use of teaching machines and other devices,
not to mention sleep-teaching.
Thirdly, we are clearly in need of a great deal of carefully controlled
empirical research on the effectiveness of different teaching methods. But
without the clearest concept of what teaching is, it is impossible to find
appropriate behavioural criteria whereby to assess what goes on in the
classroom. Most teaching methods new and old are advocated or defended
on little more than hunch or personal prejudice. What we need to know
are some relevant empirical facts, but these we cannot find if we are uncertain how to identify cases of teaching anyway. And finally, being clear
about what teaching is, matters vitally because how teachers understand
teaching very much affects what they actually do in the classroom. If it
is the case that our activities depend on how we ourselves see them, what
we believe about them, then if we have crazy, fuzzy ideas about teaching,
we will be likely to do crazy and fuzzy things in its name. One of the most
JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
J
I am here using terminology
which is in part the same as
that used by B. Paul Komisar:
"Teaching: Act and Enterprise", in C. J. B. Macmillan
and T. W. Nelson (eds.):
Concepts of Teaching (Rand
McNally, 1968). In spite of
certain similarities in both
terminology and approach
however, our accounts are
clearly in radical disagreement over the precise relationship between teaching
and learning, and the necessary characteristics of at
least certain of his "teaching
acts."
important things for a teacher is surely to be dear about the nature of the
central activity in which he is professionally involved. And if that is true
for teachers in general, it is certainly true for the teachers of teachers in
particular.
The question then is how do we characterize the activity of teaching
so as to distinguish it from all other activities? How, for instance, on
entering a classroom can one tell whether the teacher is in fact teaching?
What exactly has to be going on? To begin to answer the problem here
we must surely distinguish two obviously different senses in which we
talk about teaching. In the first sense we talk about teaching as an enterprise in which a person may be engaged for a long period, say all afternoon.
In this sense, a teacher spends the afternoon not in shopping, sunbathing
or taking the dog for a walk, but in fact in teaching. The term teaching is
here functioning at a very general level, labelling a whole enterprise which
may be broken down into many much more specific activities. And if
indeed we look at these more detailed elements of the enterprise, it is
perfectly plain that many of them are not activities we would in a more
restricted sense of the term wish to call "teaching" at all. Opening the
window to let in more air, sharpening a few pencils, preventing a squabble
between two pupils, all these may be legitimate parts of the enterprise of
teaching as a whole. But we do surely use the term teaching in a much
more specific sense whereby we can say that these activities are not the
activities of teaching. In this second sense then we can speak of specific
teaching activities which do not include in their number the sharpening
of pencils, the opening of windows, and all other such activities which
might form a legitimate part of the teaching enterprise as a whole. In
the rest of this paper I am not concerned with the enterprise use of the
term and would add only one point about it. Clearly for an enterprise to
be that of teaching at all it is necessary that it must contain certain specific
teaching activities. If a teacher spent the whole afternoon opening windows, sharpening pencils, cleaning her glasses and so on, she would do no
teaching in any sense at all. It is necessary therefore to the teaching
enterprise that it include specific teaching activities and all other specific
activities are part of that enterprise only because of their relation to these.1
But how are specific teaching activities to be distinguished from all other
specific activities? Why exactly is opening a window or sharpening a pencil
not teaching? Manifestly teaching is no one specific activity readily
identifiable in general circumstances like say walking or running or riding
a bicycle. There are an enormous number of specific activities which may
in fact be teaching. One might be describing a historical situation and this
WHAT IS TEACHING?
could be called teaching. One might on the other hand be saying nothing
at all, but be drawing on a blackboard, or doing a chemical experiment in
front of the pupils. All these would seem to be teaching activities in a
specific sense, so that there is no one immediately recognizable activity
which the term teaching picks out. Is there then a limited number of
specific activities which constitute teaching, so that to be teaching at all
one would have to be carrying out one of these? A teacher would then have
to know how to question, how to prove things, how to demonstrate etc.
If this were what teaching involved, it would greatly simplify the business
of teacher training and indeed it seems to me that there is a large grain
of truth in this idea. Such an approach is however too simple-minded, if
only because many, if not all, of the specific activities which occur within
teaching, also occur when one is certainly not teaching. One can tell a
story to a child who knows it backwards but who just simply enjoys hearing
it over once more. One might demonstrate something to entertain a nightclub audience. In proving something, one may be actually discovering
the proof, not teaching someone else. One may be translating something,
without teaching anything to anybody. None of these activities implies
that teaching is taking place at all. It therefore seems to be the case that
we cannot hope to get clear what teaching is simply by producing an
exhaustive list of activities of this kind.
Nevertheless, teaching is what is technically known as a polymorphous
activity: it quite literally takes many different forms. Its parallels are
thus activities like work and gardening and explicit comparisons with
these might help in the process of clarification. What does a person have
to be doing to be working? Driving a truck, working a lathe, solving
mathematical problems, drawing beer, all these activities constitute
somebody's work. Indeed any activity would seem to be in principle a
possible form of work. On the other hand, gardening is much more
limited in what it embraces. Digging, mowing the lawn, pruning, are
activities of gardening, but one cannot be doing anything as one might in
the case of work. What then about teaching? Is it in this respect more like
work or like gardening? Looked at one way teaching can take so many
different forms that, like work, there seems pretty well no limit to the
activities it can involve. Standing on one's head could in fact be part of
teaching something, so could driving, working a lathe, solving a problem.
Provided one looks at the whole range of things that can be taught, it would
seem that any activity might occur as a teaching activity. Which activities
might be involved in any particular instance will depend on exactly
what is being taught. Yet it might be insisted that though teaching, to say,
JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
drive, might involve driving, when teaching one must in fact do more than
merely drive. One must, say, demonstrate driving. This would seem to
imply that though any activity might be subsumed under the notion of
teaching, for that to be the case it must be carried out in some special way.
And this in turn suggests that all the legion activities that can figure in
teaching, to figure in that way, must be seen as occurring within a framework of the kind of specific activities mentioned earlier, such as demonstrating, proving, telling, etc. This view is I think correct and the analogy
between teaching and other polymorphous activities would seem to be most
helpful at the level of say gardening rather than at the level of say work.
Yet the parallel with gardening is strictly limited. Activities like pruning
and mowing the lawn are necessarily forms of gardening and that concept
may be exhaustively analysable in such terms. Yet it was insisted above
that demonstrating and proving are not necessarily forms of teaching and
it is by no means obvious that, limited though the range of activities of
teaching may be, there is an exhaustive list of distinct activities into which
the concept of teaching could be even partially analysed. I conclude therefore that we cannot hope to characterize specific teaching activities simply
in terms of the activities of proving, demonstrating, telling, etc. Rather,
teaching must be characterized some other way which will make it clear
to us when these activities are indeed involved in teaching and when
involved in say entertaining. It will perhaps also make plain why these
activities are peculiarly important in teaching.
How then are we going to characterize specific teaching activities at
all? I think the answer to this is that they can only be characterized in the
way in which we fundamentally characterize allhumanactivities: by looking
at their point or purpose. It is by clarifying the aim, the intention of what
is going on, that we can see when standing on one's head to demonstrate
something, or any other activity, is in fact teaching and not say simply
entertaining. The difference here is in the different, over-riding intentions
involved in each case. "What a particular activity is, what a person is doing,
depends crucially on how he himself sees the activity. To take a standard
example, if a person is seen to place a glass of liquid to his lips and slowly
drain it, what is he doing? He may be quenching his thirst, committing
suicide, or engaging in a religious ritual. Which of these if any it is,
depends on the point, purpose or intention that lies behind the physical
movements. Clearly the physical state of affairs can be described without
knowing the person's intention. It can be seen that the glass is moved by a
certain force so many inches towards his lips, and so on. But an account
of what is observed does not tell us what the activity is. Perhaps in a
WHAT IS TEACHING?
particular context we may be able to infer very readily the most likely
point of the movements and thus what activity is involved; nevertheless
it is only by reference to the intention that we can describe the activity,
and of course there is no guarantee that our external judgment of the intention, based upon our observation, is in fact correct.
Yet if a "sufficient" characterization of an activity can only be given in
terms of its intention and not in terms of its observable features, that is
not to say that certain observable features are not necessary to many particular activities. Clearly not all observable events could be described as
quenching one's thirst or celebrating Mass. Unless liquid of some sort is.
being consumed, a person cannot be quenching his thirst and on empirical
evidence alone we can dismiss such a description of many of his activities.
From observation we can rule out many possibilities of what a person is
doing even if we cannot from observation say which of the remaining
possibilities he is engaged in. The points here are fundamentally quite
simple. First, any activity is characterized by its intention, but many
intentions cannot, logically cannot, be ascribed unless certain observable
conditions hold. Secondly, for a given set of observable conditions a number of quite different intentions may be ascribable. Thirdly, in so far as
there are necessary observable conditions for a particular activity, they
are necessary conditions for there being the intention concerned in this
case. They are not conditions of a logically independent character.
What we want to know then about teaching is first, what is the intention
by which its activities are picked out from all others and secondly what
necessary observable features are there by which we can judge that some
activities could not possibly be teaching, whereas others might well be,
though we can never be certain from such external characterization alone.
A crude answer to the first of these questions is I think simple. The
intention of all teaching activities is that of bringing about learning. But
simple and banal though this answer might seem, it is I suggest an extremely important answer. It involves the claim that the concept of
teaching is in fact totally unintelligible without a grasp of the concept of
learning. It asserts that there is no such thing as teaching without the
intention to bring about learning and that therefore one cannot characterize teaching independently of characterizing learning. Until therefore we
know what learning is, it is impossible for us to know what teaching is.
The one concept is totally dependent on the other. Because of the tightest
conceptual connection then, the characterization and raison d'etre of
teaching rests on that of learning. If therefore a teacher spends the whole
afternoon in activities the concern of which is not that the pupils should
10 JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
•The common-place distinction I am here making leaves
un-noted a complexity which
any full task/achievement analysis of teaching cannot
disregard. If teaching is
directed towards another activity, that of the pupil's
learning, then the task and
achievement uses of "teaching" need to be carefully
related to possible task and
achievement uses of "learning." We are inclined to
assume that both uses of
"teaching" are directed to
the achievement use of
"learning." It is however
far from obvious that this
is always the case. Just this
problem arises again with
activities like demonstrating
and proving as Dr. Komisar
shows very plainly (see Note
i). I am, however, unhappy
about his account of these
activities, though I am far
from certain that I have
always understood him.
learn, but say the inflation of his own ego, then in fact he cannot have
been teaching at all. In these terms it could be the case that quite a large
number of professional teachers are in fact frauds most of their lives,
because their intentions are never clear. Perhaps quite a lot of our work
is misdirected because this necessary intention is lost in a welter of secondary intentions, by neglect, if not deliberately. Of course pupils may learn
many things when a teacher is not in fact teaching. That is another matter.
What would seem to be particularly important here is that in taking a
job as a professional teacher one is presumably being paid to carry out this
intention whatever else one is paid to do. If one is not going into the
classroom to bring about learning, if that is not the intention, then one
cannot, logically cannot, be teaching. This is not to say that one may not
be doing many other things which are of value. There are many ways of
occupying children's time, some of them profitable, but that does not make
them teaching. I wish to maintain therefore that the notion of teaching is
totally dependent for its characterization on the concept of learning and
that this has important practical consequences for how teachers see thenjob and therefore for what they do in the classroom.
Before going further, two particular points need commenting on.
First, there are two ways in which we talk about teaching activities in the
classroom context. The most common relates to the case in which a person
may teach in the fullest sense of that word and yet, in spite of the intention
and the appropriateness of the activities involved, the pupils may learn
absolutely nothing. Here the notion of teaching is simply that of trying
to get people to learn and no more. But there is another use of the word,
which involves the implication that not only has there been the intention
to bring about learning, but that the pupil has in fact learnt what was
intended. To say that Mr. Brown taught me to ride a bicycle, usually
means not merely that Mr. Brown tried to get me to learn to ride a bicycle,
but that I have in fact succeeded in learning this. There is thus not only a
"task" sense to the verb to teach, where trying or intending alone is
implied; there is also a "success" or "achievement" sense, where in addition to the intention, there is the implication that learning has in fact
occurred. For the rest of this paper I shall be concerned with teaching in
the "task" sense only, and in this sense it is not the case that teaching
necessarily implies learning. What teaching implies is merely the intention
to bring about learning.2
Secondly, if teaching activities are intentional, what are we to say about
all the learning that goes on in a classroom, or anywhere else, which is not
intended by the teacher? Is there not such a thing as unintentional teaching
"WHAT IS
after all? Certainly, we do sometimes talk in this way, when a particular
situation has been the occasion for significant learning. What is important
here is surely the recognition that no teacher intended the learning, though
significant things might have been picked up in the context. It will be
suggested later that it is because of certain important features in the context that make the situation similar to that in which there is the intention
to bring about learning, that we use the term teaching here, though in a
somewhat different sense. In schools we are not primarily concerned with
unintended learning. What we are concerned with is the task of bringing
about learning because we believe there is much that we can do towards
making learning more than a random business. Of course, taking the
education of children as a whole, what they pick up in the context of our
unintentional teaching may indeed be important. Still this does not alter
the fact that in schools we are centrally concerned with intentional teaching
and that as soon as we turn our attention to what has been unintentional
teaching, we thereby necessarily change its character.
The characterization of teaching given thus far, makes the concept entirely parasitic on that of learning. That being so, it would seem important
in clarifying the notion further to look at what is meant by "learning".
Even if teaching is not the label of one specific activity, is learning? The
answer I think must again be clearly no. One may learn things by trial
and error, by discovery or observation, by being told and by many other
means. But if there are many different activities of learning, what makes
them cases of learning? I suggest the answer is again found, as in the case
of teaching, by looking at the intention of the activities concerned. If the
intention of teaching involves a concern for learning, what in turn is the
intention of learning? Fortunately the answer seems not to be another
type of activity whose intention would in turn have to be clarified. The
end or aim of learning is, I suggest, always some specific achievement or
end state. There are many such end achievements: believing something
which one did not believe before, knowing something one did not know
before, being able to do something one could not do before, having a
habit one had not got before and so on. As a result of learning one may know
a scientific theory, know how to ride a bicycle, know how to calculate
a square root, know that Henry VIII had six wives, appreciate the
symphonies of Beethoven or keep one's engagements punctually. The
achievements or end states with which learning is concerned are of enormous variety and not surprisingly therefore the activities of learning are
equally varied. Learning like teaching is a polymorphous activity. If
then learning is the activity of a person, say B, the intention of which is
1 2 JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
the attainment of some particular end, we can say that B necessarily learns
something, say X, where X may be a belief, a skill, an attitude or some
other complex object that characterizes this end.
For the purpose of this paper there is no need to pursue the nature of
learning further, though two particular points must be stressed. First,
it is I think important to note that the end achievements of learning are
new states of the person and that these differ radically from each other. We
seem to be under a perpetual temptation to think that all learning results
in knowledge. Clearly this is false. Along with this too goes the temptation
to think that what we learn, X, is necessarily a truth or fact of some kind.
Clearly this is also false. To thoroughly disabuse oneself of these myths is a
first step towards getting rid of many common but quite fallacious ideas
about the nature of learning and, as a consequence, about the nature of
teaching.
Secondly it must be noted that I have assumed learning to be an activity
on the part of the learner. But just as we have a use of teaching to cover
cases when there is in fact no intention to bring about learning, so we have
uses of learning where the pupil does not in fact intend to achieve the
appropriate end which he nevertheless attains. In this sense we can speak
of non-intentional learning, where as the result of a causal process as in
hypnotism, conditioning, sleep-teaching or even the unconscious acquisition of something, the intention of the learner is not involved. It is important to recognize here that the term learning is being used for a quite
different process, in this case causal and not intentional. Nothing is to be
gained by trying to legislate one meaning for the term, cutting across
general usage which now covers both these processes. Yet the distinction
between them needs to be kept clear. Whether or not causal processes are
educationally desirable is a matter with which I am not here concerned.
Putting together what has been said about learning with what was
earlier said about teaching, we have the following account of teaching.
A teaching activity is the activity of a person, A (the teacher), the intention
of which is to bring about an activity (learning), by a person, B (the pupil),
the intention of which is to achieve some end-state (e.g. knowing, appreciating) whose object is X (e.g. a belief, attitude, skill). From this it
follows that to understand what is involved in teaching, one must start at
the other end of a logical chain of relations, with an understanding of the
end achievements to which everything is being directed. From this one
can proceed to understand what is involved in B's achieving such ends,
in learning X, and then proceed to an understanding of what is involved
in A teaching B, X. This logical dependence of teaching on learning, and
WHAT IS TEACHING? 13
learning on the nature of the achievements to which it is directed is thus
once more no mere academic matter. If teachers are not clear what end
achievements their teaching is concerned with, they cannot know what is
involved in B's learning X. And until they know what is involved in B's
learning X, they cannot know what is involved in A's teaching B, X. Any
notion of learning which is not the learning of some particular X, is as
vague as the notion of going somewhere but nowhere in particular. Equally
some particular person B is necessarily learning this X. Following the
logical chain, it is therefore only in a context where both what is to be
learnt and who is learning it are clear, that we can begin to be clear about
teaching B, X. Just as a pupil B cannot simply learn, but must necessarily
be learning X, so A cannot simply teach, he must be teaching B, and he
must be teaching B, X. It is as much a logical absurdity to say "One
teaches children not subjects" as it is to say "One teaches subjects not
children". Both of these phrases might have their slogan use, but the
serious discussion of teaching ought surely to reject such slogans in the
name of the simple logical truth, that one necessarily teaches somebody
something. Not that of course one is necessarily teaching a "subject" in
the traditional sense, but there must always be an end achievement which
somebody is learning. A great deal of discussion of modern educational
methods seems in danger of going seriously astray because of a refusal to
accept the full implications of this simple logically necessary truth.
I have so far argued that in its central use, teaching is the label for those
activities of a person A, the intention of which is to bring about in another
person B, the intentional learning of X. In addition, there would seem to
be uses of the term when the intention on the part of A is missing, but the
intentional learning on the part of B remains, and also uses when the intention on the part of A is present, but the intention on the part of B is
replaced by a causal process. But even in the central case, the intention
on the part of A to bring about the learning of X by B might be thought to
leave the characterization of teaching activities too open. On this account,
might not the strangest events count as teaching a pupil say to count,
provided this was the intention of the teacher? This would indeed be the
case if there were no necessary conditions which an activity must satisfy
before it could possibly be described as a teaching activity. Just as not all
activities could be gardening surely not all activities could be teaching?
What then are the necessary features of a publically observable kind which
all teaching activities must possess? There are I suggest at least two. As
it is necessarily the case that A teaches B, X, there is one necessary demand
on the aaivities in relation to the particular X that is being taught, and
14 JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
there is a second necessary demand in relation to the particular person B
concerned.
The first of these demands is far from easy to express. But I suggest
that in so far as one is necessarily teaching X, the specific teaching activity
involved must be what I will call "indicative" of X. By this I mean that
the activity must, either implicitly or explicitly, express or embody the X
to be learnt, so that this X is clearly indicated to the pupil as what he is to
learn. In this way the teacher makes plain in his activity what he intends
to be learnt. It is not I think at all the case that what is to be learnt must
necessarily be explicitly discernable in the activity, yet it must be so
available in some sense that the pupil's learning activity can be directed
to this as its object. It is because activities like demonstrating, telling and
proving can provide such excellent means for indicating an X that it is
intended the pupil will learn, that they play such a central part in teaching.
Yet just because these activities are such effective means for expressedly
indicating a given X, they can be significant not only in teaching but in
such other concerns as entertaining. It is only when such activities are
used in a learning context, to indicate what is to be learnt that they can
become teaching activities. The fact that specific teaching activities must
indicatively express what is to be learnt, also helps to make clear why at
times we speak of teaching in an unintentional sense. We do this, I
suggest, when certain features of a situation can be legitimately interpreted as indicatively expressing something to be learnt, though this in
fact may not be anyone's actual intention. The situation is thus interpreted as a teaching situation by the learner, when in fact, from an intentional point of view, it is no such thing. First, then specific teaching
activities must be indicative of what is to be learnt and it is for this reason
that the opening of windows and the sharpening of pencils could never be
themselves the teaching of historical facts or of Pythagoras's Theorem.
In the second place, as a specific teaching activity is necessarily concerned
with the teaching of X to a particular pupil B, it must be indicatively
expressed so that it is possible for this particular pupil B to learn X. One
might teach an undergraduate class in philosophy Wittgenstein's criticism
of the idea of a private language, by reading to the students sections from
the Philosophical Investigations. But to carry out such an activity with a
class of average six-year-olds would, I suggest, not constitute teaching at
all. Indicative though the activity might be, as the six-year-olds could
understand practically nothing that v/as being said, this could surely not
constitute teaching them Wittgenstein's views on private languages. There
is a gap between the knowledge, skills or state of mind of the learner and
WHAT IS TEACHING.-1
 15
what it is he is to learn, which it seems to me any teaching activity must
seek to bridge if it is to deserve that label. Teaching activities must therefore take place at a level where the pupil can take on what it is intended he
should learn. It must be possible, and this seems to me a logical point,
for learning to take place. This logical demand is for the teacher to have
psychological and other knowledge about the learner, and it clearly means
that many specific things cannot possibly be taught to a given pupil given
his present state of knowledge, skill etc. I conclude therefore that a specific
teaching activity must necessarily indicatively express the X to be learnt
by B and be so related to the present state of B that he can learn X.
It might be objected to my second necessary demand for teaching activities, that to misjudge the present state of the pupils does not disqualify
a person's activities from properly being described as teaching. Surely he
has taught X whether the pupils have learnt X or not. Certainly teaching
does not necessarily imply learning, but it does necessarily imply the
intention of bringing about learning by someone, and if from one's activities it is impossible for that someone to learn what is intended, it does seem
very odd to describe such activities as teaching. One reason why we are
inclined to think that there could be teaching even when the present state
of the pupils is grossly misjudged, is I think that we spend so much of
our time teaching classes not individuals and the condition I am insisting
on seems to make almost impossible demands. Must it not be the case
that in any class with a wide ability range, what is presented is in fact
inappropriate for some of the pupils? If we are to stick to the individualistic
model I have used, must we not say that in even the "task" sense, only some
of the class have been taught X, and not others? Strictly I think the answer
to that must be yes. But perhaps it would be better simply to recognize that
we do use the word teaching both for activities aimed at group learning as
well as individual learning. In the case of a group, what a teacher does if he
is teaching them all the same X is to work with an appropriate norm for
the attainments of that group. What constitutes an appropriate norm
cannot I think be generally stated; nevertheless it seems to me that without
working to such a norm there could be no activities that could properly
be described as teaching the group. It might of course be argued, and with
some justice, that properly understood, teaching a group necessarily
involves attention to the individual differences of the pupils.
As a final comment on the two criteria which I have suggested are
necessary to any teaching activity, it is I think instructive to note that in
these terms opposing virtues and defects have tended to characterize both
traditional formal teaching methods and more contemporary progressive
JOURNAL OF CURRICULUM STUDIES
alternatives. Traditional teaching methods have above all concerned
themselves with the indicative features of these activities, often meeting
the present learning state of the pupils in an over-generalized and inadequate way. In reaction, more progressive methods have tended to cater
extremely well for the present learning state of individual pupils, but at
the expense of the necessary indicative features that teaching activities
must embody. It is not that either group of methods is of itself necessarily
deficient as teaching activities, and each might well have its place according
to what exactly is being taught and to whom. What is important is that
we come to realize that in all teaching activities both these necessary
features need the fullest responsible consideration.
In concluding this paper I would like to return to the problem of
clarifying the nature of such activities as indoctrinating, conditioning,
preaching, training, instructing and so on, as the characterization of
teaching that I have outlined can I think help in this process. As here
considered teaching activities form a very broad category indeed, one
which is in no sense restricted to those activities we think it appropriate
for schools to undertake. I have been concerned with teaching and learning
in general, whatever the ends concerned, be they bad habits, perversions,
concepts, facts, physical skills, etc. In so far then as indoctrination and other
activities involve the intention to bring about learning of some kind, they
involve teaching and in so far as they are themselves processes for bringing
about learning of certain kinds they are themselves forms of teaching.
From all that has been said about teaching, different categories of teaching
activity can clearly be distinguished in a number of distinct ways. The
object or objects to be learnt can be of one particular kind rather than
another. The activity of learning may be of a specific sort, or the activity
of the teacher might be restricted in some particular way. Clearly there
are likely to be labels for certain types of teaching which become important
for specific purposes and it is, I suggest, by looking at the particular subclass of teaching activities involved that we are most likely to distinguish
indoctrination, instruction, and so on.
Indoctrination, for example, would certainly seem to be picked out, at
least in part, by the distinctive end state of mind of the learner, to which
the teaching is directed. An indoctrinated person would seem to hold
.J- ,?•. White, "Indoc- certain beliefs unshakably.3
 In this case what the person is intended to
(O?°The concept 0/ I&IS- learn, the X, is distinctive here, though in exactly what way it is important
p°"i (R(£
1
^
edsc an d
 Kegan to note. On this criterion, it is nothing about the beliefs themselves that
'
I 9
 distinguishes indoctrination, but some higher order beliefs about their
status, or some attitude to them. But however this characterization is
WHAT IS TEACHING? 17
given, it is expressible in terms of certain distinctive objects for learning.
Some have suggested that there is in fact something distinctive about the
beliefs themselves in that one can only indoctrinate in matters of opinion
or doctrines. Again this is to distinguish the teaching activities of indoctrination in terms of what is being taught. It can also be argued that indoctrination is restricted to certain learning processes, or that unintentional indoctrination is a contradiction. My point here is not to decide
exactly what is meant by indoctrination or any other of these terms, but
rather to indicate how a clarification of them might be helpfully approached.
What is however plain from the work that has already been done on
the concept of indoctrination, is that most terms in this area are likely to be
in some respects unclear, being used in a number of inter-related ways.
What matters then is not what any "correct" use might be, but rather
the conceptual distinctions that arise in this area. If, for instance, the
notion of "believing unshakably" is seen as a distinctive result of some forms
of teaching, and we for our purposes call these forms indoctrination, then
indoctrination is being sharply distinguished from teaching leading to
the holding of beliefs rationally, which many regard as a necessary part
of education. Once we know the possible meanings of these very tricky
terms we know our way around their relationships much better. We are
clearer too about the significance of many of the things we do when engaged in teaching.
The distinctive features of such processes as conditioning and sleepteaching would seem to be that they involve causal and not intentional
learning or if it is intentional, it is intentional in some very particular sense.
Whether or not these processes ought to figure within indoctrination or
education, will of course depend on one's account of these latter processes.
Training and instructing on the other hand would seem to be concepts
connected unmistakably with intentional learning, the difference between
them being determined by the particular group of end achievements with
which each is concerned.
And finally, what of teaching machines: can such machines be properly
said to teach? In terms of the analysis I have here given the idea that a
piece of hardware can of itself teach is nonsense, for it itself can have no
intentions and cannot engage in activities. But taken in the proper context
I see no reason why a machine, properly programmed, should not be the
instrument of a teaching activity. It is indeed the machine programmed
so that it indicatively expresses what is to be learnt, in such a way that the
pupil can in fact learn, because it meets his current state of mind, that
must be thought of as the teaching agent. The appropriate programming
J.CS. B
18 JOURNAL OF CURRICULUiM STUDIES
of the machine is of course an essential part of the teaching activity as a
whole. What the invention of books, let alone teaching machines, made
possible, was a separation in time between the teacher's expression of what
is to be learnt and the pupil's encounter with this. Nothing new in
principle is introduced into the idea of a teaching activity. What is however
available here to the pupil is a programme of indicatively expressive activities drawn up after expert consideration of the problems involved in
pupils' learning that might be much better for the task than the live activities of the teacher available. As the teaching activities that involve the
use of such machines must be completely predetermined, it is of course
important that the details of the programme be constructed with the utmost care and that it be appropriate to the learning state of the pupils.
It is of course only when these conditions are fulfilled that in using the
machine these pupils could be said to be being taught.
Throughout this paper I have been concerned with mapping the features
that distinguish teaching activities from all others. It has not been my
concern to lay down the criteria for good teaching or even successful
teaching. Successful teaching would seem to be simply teaching which
does in fact bring about the desired learning. Good teaching is however
much more difficult to discern. I am not even sure that successful learning
is a criterion for good teaching. Certainly in a given particular case there
is no contradiction in saying that a person was successfully yet badly
taught. Yet in so far as this account of teaching is correct, it has at least
indicated which activities we are concerned to study in a critical comparison
of teaching activities. What is more it must have at least some important
implications for the methods whereby such comparisons must be made.
But what these are, will not be gone into here, if only because such elaboration would be rather premature when the criteria for what teaching is
are not yet agreed. It is towards establishing what these criteria are that
this paper has been primarily directed.
The major philosophical papers which discuss the nature of teaching can be found
in three collections of articles:
C B. J. Macmillan and T. W. Nelson, (eds.), Concepts of Teaching (Rand McNally,
1968).
R. S. Peters, (ed.)3 The Concept of Education, (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967).
B. P. Komisar and C. B. J. Macmillan, (eds.), Psychological Concepts in Education
(Rand McNally, 1967).
There are also important chapters in:
I. Scheffler, The Language of Education (Thomas, Illinois, i960).
G. Langford, Philosophy and Education (Macmillan, 1968).


